Overhaul environment variables documentation (#5736)
plone/volto: docs/source/configuration/environmentvariables.md

# Environment variables

> This page describes environment variables and their usage for configuration of your Volto application at runtime.

Reviewer: We are loosing information in this rewrite, and I think it's relevant.

Reviewer 2: @sneridagh I think it's still here, just reordered

Author: @sneridagh which information is lost? I didn't really delete anything, but I shuffled things around and added some clarification.

Reviewer 2: @sneridagh It is there: https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/5736/files#diff-00609ed769cd40cf3bc3d6fcc4431b714cb37c73cedaaea18fe9fc4c1c589597R183

Author: @sneridagh it was moved to the end. See https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/5736#discussion_r1480873445 and either https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/5736/files#diff-00609ed769cd40cf3bc3d6fcc4431b714cb37c73cedaaea18fe9fc4c1c589597R181 or https://deploy-preview-5736--volto.netlify.app/configuration/environmentvariables.html#access-environment-variables-in-a-browser. I find the Netlify preview easier to parse than this diff.

In any case, if you think it should be moved elsewhere, please specify where, and I can make it happen. Thank you!

Reviewer: wtf, I just did a search and I overlooked it, sorry about the noise LGTM

    It uses the `volto:` namespace.
    You can use it in a specific named scope or everywhere.

    `shadowing` enables component shadowing errors.
    It displays the errors of the non-compliant customizations in the server console.
    It helps you identify problems with a customization that does not work as you expect.

    ```shell
    DEBUG=volto:shadowing yarn start
    ```

    `i18n` enables the log of missing internationalization messages in the console.

    ```shell
    DEBUG=volto:i18n yarn start
    ```

    `*` enables logging everywhere it exists in Volto.

    ```shell
    DEBUG=volto:* yarn start
    ```

`DEBUG_ADDONS_LOADER`
    Set `DEBUG_ADDONS_LOADER=true` to have Volto generate a file, {file}`addon-dependency-graph.dot`, which contains a graph of all the loaded add-ons.
    You can use [Graphviz](https://graphviz.org/) to convert this file to an image with:

    ```
    dot addon-dependency-graph.dot -Tsvg -o out.svg
    ```

`ADDONS`
    You can use the `ADDONS` environment variable to enable and configure add-ons in your project.

    When running your app, the add-ons will be loaded in the following order:

>     -   the file `package.json`

Reviewer: I think it's worth to say that it's additive, never removes or invalidates the others.

Author: Done in [72f294f](https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/5736/commits/72f294fc54be7c786bd71bb15e0fc70713f8ae02)

# Environment variables

This page describes environment variables and their usage for configuration of your Volto application at runtime.

> ## Access environment variables

Reviewer 2: This section is sort of an obscure debugging hint. It seems odd to put it above the actual list of environment variables, which is probably what someone reading this page is looking for.

Author: Although obscure, is it frequently useful? I assumed it was applicable all the time in the general sense.

If it is rarely useful for only a specific case, then this heading and text should reflect that _and_ be demoted.

Reference documentation usually flows from general usage for all, to specific usage for each, and then the special cases. Of course, there are always exceptions.

Reviewer 2: @stevepiercy Well, I didn't know about it before, and I haven't missed it.

Author: Gotcha. Fixed in [1a639ab](https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/5736/commits/1a639ab55084b7ea67e5eddf6db16031acf8919b)

All environment variables defined at runtime with the "RAZZLE_" prefix are available in your browser under the `window.env` global object.
For example, start the application with an environment variable as shown.

```shell
RAZZLE_MY_VARIABLE=some_value build/server.js
```

In the frontend, you can access this variable in your code with the following.

```shell
window.env.RAZZLE_MY_VARIABLE
```

## Runtime environment variables

```{versionadded} 13
```

All configurable environment variables work at runtime, not only at build time.
You could, for example, build your Volto application, then start it in production with the `RAZZLE_API_PATH` environment variable.

```shell
yarn build && RAZZLE_API_PATH=https://plone.org yarn start:prod
```

This brings you a lot of power since you don't have to rebuild on every configuration change.
You can also generate builds on your continuous integration, then deploy them anywhere.

## Environment variable reference

````{glossary}
:sorted:
`RAZZLE_LEGACY_TRAVERSE`

>     {doc}`../deploying/seamless-mode` is the recommended way of setting up your deployments since Volto 14.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If `true`, Volto will construct API URLs without the `/++api++` prefix.

    This is not needed if you are using {doc}`../deploying/seamless-mode`, which is the recommended way to set up your deployments since Volto 14.
```

    ```shell
    yarn add volto-slate
    ADDONS=volto-slate:asDefault yarn start
    ```

    `ADDONS` can also be used to temporarily enable a feature or a set of customizations.

    ```shell
    # given a folder './packages/coresandbox', like in vanilla Volto
    ADDONS=coresandbox:multilingualFixture yarn start
    ```

    You can specify multiple add-ons, seperated by commas:
    
    ```shell
    ADDONS=test-addon,test-addon2 yarn start
    ```
    
    You can specify profiles for installation:
    
    ```shell
    ADDONS=test-addon:profile1,test-addon2:profile2 yarn start
    ```

    The following code snippets demonstrate how to configure add-ons.

    First in `package.json`:
    
    ```json
    "addons": [
        "@kitconcept/volto-blocks-grid"
    ]
    ```

    Then in `volto.config.js`:

    ```js
    module.exports = {
        addons: ['@eeacms/volto-accordion-block']
    }
    ```

    And finally using `ADDONS`:

    ```shell
    yarn add volto-slate
    ADDONS=volto-slate:asDefault yarn start
    ```

    If you need to specify several add-ons, separate them with a semicolon (`;`):

    ```shell
    yarn add volto-slate

>     ADDONS="volto-slate:asDefault;@kitconcept/volto-blocks-grid" yarn start

Reviewer 3: @stevepiercy my only nitpick is about having this example here because it might be confusing to see that kitconcept/volto-blocks-grid is also referenced within the addons key while it is also in the package.json.
Given the resolution of package, volto.config, ADDONS key you might not be careful that you had it in package.json and think why you have this order.

Author: I focused only on reformatting existing content. I have no idea what I'm doing with Volto code. I'd appreciate any code improvement that you can provide.

I prefer not to add text to explain code. If code needs explanation, it may be a sign that it is not good code. But since the context is important to resolution, an explanation may be best. I'm fine with whatever you think is best.

Author: Thanks, your changes look good to me!
